---
title: "My Experience with Online Learning"
date: 2021-03-22T13:29:40+06:00
author: sksaad
slug: "online-learning"
description: ""
keywords: ["university", "onlline-class", "canada", "education", "experience", "tourism"]
draft: false
tags: ["thoughts"]
math: false
toc: true
---

## My Story

I'm currently an undergraduate student studying at Saint Mary's University, Nova Scotia, Canada. As my major, I've chosen Computer Science (they call it computing science, but it's practically the same thing), as I had a keen interest in computers, science and technology from a very young age. Because of the ongoing pandemic, our school has decided to provide online classes with some optional in-person experiences. To save money on residence, food and other costs, I've decided to do online classes from Bangladesh until in-person classes fully begin. Here's my experience with online learning thus far.

## The Woes

Online classes can be hectic, especially if your school is on the other side of the globe. Ideally, you'd want to start your morning with classes, take some rest and start working on your assignments in the afternoon or evening. With online classes, I'm having to do the opposite - assignments in the morning, get exhausted from all the work, barely have any energy for classes in the evening/night. On Wednesday nights (or Thursday morning) at 3 AM, I have a 2 hr recitation class too, so that's not helping my health either.

## The Joys

That being said, I'm loving the different atmosphere of foreign universities. The teachers are mostly extremely helpful (not all though) and I'm glad to say my CS professor is the most joyful and inspiring character I've met out of all the professors there (Maths professor is the least, sadly). That teacher has humour, intellect, experience, a Ph.D. (of course he does) and is a complete joy to learn from. I'm glad I got him from the first year in my major course.

## Make Friends

I'm also enjoying the virtual company of my peers, although I'd love to meet them in person. As that's currently impossible, this is the best we can get. I'm thrilled to be able to share ideas and converse with so many people with similar interests and passions. I've also been able to build up a Discord server of 230+ students (many inactive accounts, but whatever. I tried). The owner of the server was kind enough to let me handle it when it was only about 20 people, and together, myself, the owner, and a senior at SMU were able to build it up to what it is today, with a little help from some of the members. Now we have different channels for different courses, reaction roles so that we can choose what course channels we can see and of course, many enthusiastic and active members.

## Explore Opportunities

I've even become part of a team of enthusiastic CS undergrads and we're hopefully set to make a little project of ours - a visual novel game - to practice our skills, learn new ones and get some hands-on experience in working with a team on a real project. A good idea if you're looking to build up your portfolio and have a good first impression on potential employers.

## Time Management

Make sure you use your time wisely though, as scheduling is very important. If you procrastinate, it becomes very difficult to cope up with the horde of assignments, quizzes, tests, recitations and everything else the University throws at you. Even though I managed to do a 2-month assignment in 2 days and still scored 28 out of 30 (don't be me. it was insanely exhausting). Be on top of your schedule and you'll be fine.

## Mental Health

Many universities, including mine, offer many free workshops and counselling sessions throughout the course of the degree. Make sure you take full advantage of these and always mail the advisors, counsellors and professors whenever you're in a pinch. They're really helpful and understanding and will patiently guide you through whatever you're having trouble with. Also, please do keep a check on your mental health. Many students face issues for a variety of reasons and there are often free counselling sessions available. Make your money worth it, and don't neglect yourself.

## Your Story

Something important some of us forget to do in school is building up a network of peers, seniors and professors, and make memories that enrich your life. While grades are pretty important still (because we study in an education system for the 1800s), these human resources are such that they can bring a lot more value to your life. University is the time to explore your interests, so make some friends, do personal projects, join or form clubs and enjoy your time.

**THIS IS YOUR TIME TO SHINE. DO YOUR BEST. (^_^)**